this week hundreds of thousands of
students started classes at colleges and
universities and one thing is
increasingly clear by the time they
graduate most students are going to be
leaving with a lot more than just a
tacky polyester robe and a copy of other
places you'll go that their teeth
tearful aren't got them they'll be
leaving with this seven of ten
graduating students left college last
year in debt
the total bill due for students in
America tops one trillion dollars that's
right student debt in the u.s. is now
bigger than debt from credit cards and
auto loans and is second only to
mortgages essentially student debt is
like HPV if you go to college you're
almost certainly going to get it and if
you do it will follow you for the rest
of your life because legally student
debt is a special kind of debt it is the
most collectible kind of debt there is
it is non-dischargeable in bankruptcy
they will garnish your wages they will
intercept your your tax refunds they
will sue you in court they won't stop
there they'll steal your wallets they'll
pawn your baby shoes they will shrink
themselves down to two inches high hide
in your pocket and take that money back
one dime at a time student debt has
tripled in the past decade it has
surpassed Bob Marley's greatest hits
album as the thing seemingly every
college students has how did this happen
well more than 90 percent of student
debt is subsidized by the federal
government and it all started with such
good intentions here is one of the
federal student loan programs early
champions poverty must not be a bar to
learning and learning must offer and
escape from poverty ah escape from
poverty by the way the single worst Kurt
Russell movie ever made
but a higher education system open to
all was one of LBJ's top priorities
along with creating of course a Libyan
pool party in Vietnam and and finding a
pair of pants that could contain his
gigantic testicles now that last one
might sound like a joke but listen to
this actual phone conversation that he
had in the Oval Office with a
representative from the Haggar clothing
company the Crites down were you nuts
Hank is always a little too tight so
when you make them up give me a eat that
I can read out there because they cut me
this is like right now
why offense good cgk believe me about
the needs from the for the zipper ends
round under my back my bunghole
look we all thought they'd be in LBJ
stood for Bates but it actually stands
for balls balls my big bulbous balls are
too close to my bunghole isn't history
fun but like LBJ's testicles the federal
student loan program has now swollen too
uncomfortable proportions one reason for
this might be that in recent years
states have slashed funding for higher
education by 23% public institutions
have responded by raising tuition rates
forcing students to take out ever larger
loans why else do you think the colleges
have so many a cappella groups
they know they sound stupid they just
can't afford instruments anymore another
consequence of these cuts has been that
some community colleges have been forced
to reduce capacity leading to things
like a nursing program in North Carolina
with a waiting list just to get on the
waiting list because that is what you
need in the land of tobacco and barbecue
a shortage of nurses but all this shows
that people in this country that they
want to go to school to better their
lives and it is good that they have
broad access to federal funds to help
them do that the problem is this is
where we meet one of the biggest drivers
of student debt for-profit schools like
University of Phoenix and ITT Tech most
of them are publicly traded on Wall
Street and they run commercials like
this one evening I was watching TV and
then the night ET Tech commercial came
on and I decided to give them a call I
think my education is paid off
tremendously I got into the field of
aerospace it's been over 12 years now
there's nothing I would change about my
life we've been married almost 10 years
now we have two beautiful boys
everything is perfect that's nice
although I will say there's something
about the phrase everything is perfect
that I find inherently suspicious
because the only other person who says
that is Janice in accounting and she
secretly puts Jim Beam in her coffee cup
and repeats keep you together you can do
this Janis into the bathroom mirror five
times a day for-profit schools account
for nearly 1/3 of all student loans
despite having just 13% of our country
students that is way out of proportion
and part of why for-profit schools
account for so much student debt is that
they are not cheap I was surprised to
learn how expensive tuition at the
for-profits is five to six times the
cost of a community college and as much
as twice a four-year state university
Wow five to six times the cost of a
community college plus you don't even
get to hang out with a study group full
of lovable scamp's for let's say for
let's say six seasons in a movie but if
you are wondering why they charge so
much it is nothing to do with the
quality of education if you take a look
at for-profit colleges the analysts will
tell you that anywhere between twenty
and twenty-five percent of the total
revenue of the company is in sales and
marketing about a quarter in most cases
the faculty are in the 10 to 20 percent
range they spend half the amount on
teachers that they do on marketing think
about that is amazing you say hey
teachers we're not saying you don't
matter we just say ads about you matter
twice as much well one for you two for a
spot during Wayne Brady
that's about fair the thing is from a
purely business perspective that
disparity makes some kind of sense when
I go and buy perfume for my mom the
chemicals in the bottle and the bottle
itself amount to about 50 Cent's the
advertising amounts to five or six bucks
okay for start stop buying perfume for
your mom you creep
I like the way you smell mum you smell
good and secondly perfume is not
educational although I will say both do
market themselves aggressively with
perfume its spraying it into people's
eyes when they walk into a department
store and for for-profit schools it's
actually even worse Zahra Crowley was a
recruiter at the for-profit Westwood
College in 2007 Crowley says she quit
because she couldn't continue preying on
low-income youth and using something
called pain points pain point would be
something they work at McDonald's they
don't want to be like their parents
we'd turn it on him and say I thought
you wanted to do something with your
life do you want to work at McDonald's
for the rest of your life yeah they are
told to hit people's pain points the
only professionals who should be doing
that are dominatrixes or emo bands
that's it and this pain point approach
seems to be an industry-wide
technique this is an actual slide some
ITT Tech recruiters were shown during
training that photo is from Marathon Man
where Laurence Olivier famously played a
Nazi torturer and it's maybe not saying
much for your business model if your
essential logic is hey guys this works
really well for the Nazis let's at least
give it a go but if you do sign up for
one of these schools what kind of
education are you going to get well
remember the ITT Tech graduate from
earlier and his absolutely perfect life
well well actually says on the screen
that he graduated with an associate's
degree in engineering from itt's Sylmar
campus and we checked their public
filings and out of 115 students who
enrolled in that program in the class of
2012 three-quarters didn't graduate and
only 13 found work in that field meaning
everyone else would have genuinely been
better off studying engineering at
Hogwarts and at least that way they'd
have a owl to show for it
and even for those who do graduate job
hunting might be a little difficult as
students from a Corinthian College
Nursing program found I've been on
countless interviews and they all asked
if I've ever been in a hospital and I
would have to tell them we never set
foot in a hospital ever we went to a
Museum of Scientology for our
psychiatric rotation what Scientologists
do not believe in psychiatry their
museum is literally called psychiatry
and Industry of death going to the
Museum of Scientology for your
psychiatric rotation is certifiably
insane
or evidence of a buildup of thetans in
your system it's there's no that you
teach the controversy now now full
disclosure we asked Corinthian about
this and they requested that we point
out a few things such as the fact that
those women later sued the school a
financial settlement was reached and
that those women later went on to become
registered nurses and and also that us
not mentioning of those facts to you
would constitute reckless disregard for
the truth I mean not the kind of
reckless disregard for the truth that
would lead you to send medical students
to a scientology museum you know pretty
reckless pretty reckless well also
they also they also wanted us to take
clear and extensive note of subsequent
events and interest of doing that you
should know that this summer after a
government investigation of their job
placement numbers Corinthian Colleges
have agreed to sell or close every
school they operate in the u.s. I
presume that that's what they wanted us
to tell you so job done now to be fair
to be fair here we're good with it yeah
now to be fair here the federal
government does try to regulate these
schools they are only allowed a me and
ninety percent of their funding to come
from federal loans however for-profit
schools have found themselves a truly
horrifying loophole the 90/10 rule says
that the schools can only have 90
percent of their money coming from loans
but the other 10 percent could come from
veteran loans they exempted the veterans
benefits so these schools have gone
after the veterans benefits as a way to
leverage their ability to sign up more
students yeah they're going after
veterans and the only time going after
veterans is okay is when you let them
walk through the door in front of you
not when you try to take their
money now for-profit schools took in 1.7
billion dollars in GI Bill money in the
last reported school year alone and this
is the length to which Ashford
University was willing to go to get that
sweet sweet budget assisting veteran
dollar I went to a Marine base in North
Carolina and I found that one of the
for-profit colleges was sending a
recruiter to the wounded warriors
barracks where she was signing up brain
injured Marines who even had difficulty
remembering what courses they were
taking holy I will say this for
for-profit schools they've just given us
all a first-class education in the
depths of human depravity we all have a
diploma in that now and here is where I
actually have some good news and some
bad news for you the good news is a few
years back the Obama administration
proposed tighter gainful employment
standards the bad news is everything
that happened after that the for-profit
industry spent 10
million dollars in lobbying that year
and also and this thankfully is a fun
bit their trade group inundated the
government with thousands of letters
from ordinary students and educators
asking them not to tighten the
regulations and let me read one to you
it reads I am a career college student
at institution studying program
institution is providing me with the
education and training necessary to
obtain the job I've always wanted as a
career
many many people didn't even bother
filling in the blanks couldn't they at
least have done it a bit like Mad Libs
you could have gone to but cheese
University seeking a degree in Wiener
studies go the extra mile and the worst
thing is the campaign worked the gainful
employment rules were weakened and
eventually struck down completely the
latest version of the rules are expected
by November and the for-profit school
trade group app skew is still lobbying
hard against them and if you'd like to
let app skew know how you feel about
their industry's behavior we've actually
prepared a form letter for you which
reads to whom it may concern I am named
here a human being with described at
least some level of sense then we sick
of your synonym for well under
the benefits
whatever the benefits whatever the
benefits are for-profit schools your
trade group is protecting some of the
worst actors and additional insults IDs
for places to cram this letter once
rattled up proposals for human waste
products to be eaten thank you for your
time name here again feel free feel free
to go online copy this letter please do
not bother to fill it in at all and send
it to apps queue at this address and
that might make you feel a little bit
better but it will only be temporary
because the student debt problem is far
bigger than just for-profit schools if
they all went away
student debt problem would still be here
because our leaders have decided that
while education is incredibly important
it is not important enough to actually
pay for so with that in mind let me
speak right now to all current freshmen
in college who have student loans okay
you need to stop watching this show
right now you don't have time for this
get out there and enjoy the out of your
college experience because you may be
paying for it for the rest of your life
I am serious drink beer from a funnel at
kidnapper mascot find out if you're gay
or not and even if you are not have some
gay experiences do it now it doesn't
count I've become that weird guy on
campus who rides a unicycle from class
to class find out however the Winklevoss
twins of your school are and steal their
idea for a website and shoot fireworks
out of every bodily orifice you can find
do it now please make sure your college
years are the best ones of your life
because thanks to the debt that we are
saddling you with they almost certainly
will be get up there and do it
Oh